README.md, before:

# Build a Linux Desktop with bootc

## The architecture
A Gnome based desktop Linux system using Flatpaks as a mean to provide applications for the user.
Upon first boot, a list of popular desktop applications are downloaded in the background. On subsequent boots, the system will check for available updates of those Flatpaks applications.

## Building container

### Fedora
```shell
% podman build -f fedora/Containerfile -t fedora-bootc:43
```

### CentOS Stream
```shell
% podman build -f centos/Containerfile -t centos-bootc:c10s
```

## Creating a VM image

You may want to pull the bootc image builder prior to running the build
```shell
% podman pull quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest
```

### Building the qcow2 image
#### Fedora
```shell
% sudo podman run --rm -it --privileged --pull=newer --security-opt label=type:unconfined_t -v $(pwd)/output/fedora:/output -v /var/lib/containers/storage:/var/lib/containers/storage -v ./fedora/config.toml:/config.toml:ro quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest --type qcow2 --rootfs btrfs localhost/fedora-bootc:43
```

#### CentOS Stream
```shell
% sudo podman run --rm -it --privileged --pull=newer --security-opt label=type:unconfined_t -v $(pwd)/output/centos:/output -v /var/lib/containers/storage:/var/lib/containers/storage -v ./centos/config.toml:/config.toml:ro quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest --type qcow2 localhost/centos-bootc:c10s
```

### Running the image locally (on arm64)
You need an EFI image to boot, here named `flash0.img`.
#### Fedora
```shell
% qemu-system-aarch64 -name fedora -m 8G -smp 4 -drive file=output/fedora/qcow2/disk.qcow2,if=virtio -drive file=flash0.img,format=raw,if=pflash -device virtio-gpu-pci -display default,show-cursor=on -usb -device qemu-xhci -device usb-kbd -device usb-mouse -cpu cortex-a57 -M virt,accel=hvf
```

#### CentOS Stream
```shell
% qemu-system-aarch64 -name centos -m 8G -smp 4 -drive file=output/centos/qcow2/disk.qcow2,if=virtio -drive file=flash0.img,format=raw,if=pflash -device virtio-gpu-pci -display default,show-cursor=on -usb -device qemu-xhci -device usb-kbd -device usb-mouse -cpu cortex-a57 -M virt,accel=hvf
```

## Plymouth boot splash screen
When targetting a physical machine with screen, you can add Plymouth to get a user-friendly boot splash scrren.
To get that, you'll need to use dracut to rebuild the initramfs.
First, install the packages `plymouth plymouth-theme-spinfinity` with dnf in your Containerfile. Then:
```shell
RUN plymouth-set-default-theme spinfinity && \
    mkdir -p /usr/lib/bootc/kargs.d && \
    echo 'kargs = ["quiet", "splash", "rhgb"]' > /usr/lib/bootc/kargs.d/01-splash.toml && \
    kver=$(cd /lib/modules && ls -1 | sort -V | tail -n1) && \
    env DRACUT_NO_XATTR=1 dracut -vf --gzip --no-hostonly --reproducible --add plymouth --add-driver "virtio_gpu simpledrm" /usr/lib/modules/$kver/initramfs.img "$kver"
```
Add the approriate driver for your target such as AMD, nouveau for Nvidia or i915 for Intel.

## Improving boot time
The base image used is a server variant with systemd services enabled that might be of no use for a desktop system on baremetal. Some virtual machine hosting RPMs and services could be removed for desktop. Services related to qemu for example are only useful for a virtual machine. If you delete some packages present in the base image, remember to build with `-squash-all`.
By using `systemctl disable` in the Containerfile, you can prevent those services from starting at boot time.

## Graphical environment 

### guest login
xguest is needed to create transient guest user accounts.
In the Containerfile, when using lightdm for Xfce, the following settings must be applied:
```shell
RUN sed -i 's/#allow-guest=true/allow-guest=true/g' /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf && \
    sed -i 's/#autologin-guest=false/autologin-guest=true/g' /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf
```

Commit message:

Removed some simple Gnome multimedia apps that are replaced by feature rich apps from Flathub. Added Gnome extension to keep dash to dock. Timezone is now set on first boot based on current geo-location

README.md, after:

# Build a Linux Desktop with bootc

## The architecture
A Gnome based desktop Linux system using Flatpaks as a mean to provide applications for the user.
Upon first boot, a list of popular desktop applications are downloaded in the background. On subsequent boots, the system will check for available updates of those Flatpaks applications.

## Building container

### Fedora
```shell
% podman build -f fedora/Containerfile -t fedora-bootc:43
```

### CentOS Stream
```shell
% podman build -f centos/Containerfile -t centos-bootc:c10s
```

## Creating a VM image

You may want to pull the bootc image builder prior to running the build
```shell
% podman pull quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest
```

### Building the qcow2 image
#### Fedora
```shell
% sudo podman run --rm -it --privileged --pull=newer --security-opt label=type:unconfined_t -v $(pwd)/output/fedora:/output -v /var/lib/containers/storage:/var/lib/containers/storage -v ./fedora/config.toml:/config.toml:ro quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest --type qcow2 --rootfs btrfs localhost/fedora-bootc:43
```

#### CentOS Stream
```shell
% sudo podman run --rm -it --privileged --pull=newer --security-opt label=type:unconfined_t -v $(pwd)/output/centos:/output -v /var/lib/containers/storage:/var/lib/containers/storage -v ./centos/config.toml:/config.toml:ro quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest --type qcow2 localhost/centos-bootc:c10s
```

### Running the image locally (on arm64)
You need an EFI image to boot, here named `flash0.img`.
#### Fedora
```shell
% qemu-system-aarch64 -name fedora -m 8G -smp 4 -drive file=output/fedora/qcow2/disk.qcow2,if=virtio -drive file=flash0.img,format=raw,if=pflash -device virtio-gpu-pci -display default,show-cursor=on -usb -device qemu-xhci -device usb-kbd -device usb-mouse -cpu cortex-a57 -M virt,accel=hvf
```

#### CentOS Stream
```shell
% qemu-system-aarch64 -name centos -m 8G -smp 4 -drive file=output/centos/qcow2/disk.qcow2,if=virtio -drive file=flash0.img,format=raw,if=pflash -device virtio-gpu-pci -display default,show-cursor=on -usb -device qemu-xhci -device usb-kbd -device usb-mouse -cpu cortex-a57 -M virt,accel=hvf
```

## Plymouth boot splash screen
When targetting a physical machine with screen, you can add Plymouth to get a user-friendly boot splash scrren.
To get that, you'll need to use dracut to rebuild the initramfs.
First, install the packages `plymouth plymouth-theme-spinfinity` with dnf in your Containerfile. Then:
```shell
RUN plymouth-set-default-theme spinfinity && \
    mkdir -p /usr/lib/bootc/kargs.d && \
    echo 'kargs = ["quiet", "splash", "rhgb"]' > /usr/lib/bootc/kargs.d/01-splash.toml && \
    kver=$(cd /lib/modules && ls -1 | sort -V | tail -n1) && \
    env DRACUT_NO_XATTR=1 dracut -vf --gzip --no-hostonly --reproducible --add plymouth --add-driver "virtio_gpu simpledrm" /usr/lib/modules/$kver/initramfs.img "$kver"
```
Add the approriate driver for your target such as AMD, nouveau for Nvidia or i915 for Intel.

## Improving image size and boot time
The base image used is a server variant with systemd services enabled or VM guest agents that are of no use for a desktop system. 

The shipped Gnome Boxes application and its meany depedencies for managing virtual machines could be removed for a regular desktop usage.

If you delete some packages present in the base image, remember to build with `-squash-all`.
By using `systemctl disable` in the Containerfile, you can prevent those services from starting at boot time.

## Graphical environment 

### guest login
xguest is needed to create transient guest user accounts.
In the Containerfile, when using lightdm for Xfce, the following settings must be applied:
```shell
RUN sed -i 's/#allow-guest=true/allow-guest=true/g' /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf && \
    sed -i 's/#autologin-guest=false/autologin-guest=true/g' /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf
```
